homeworks/dear_data.md, before:

---
title: A1 - Dear Data
---

# Assignment 1: Dear Data

In this assignment, you will observe, collect, and sketch (with pen and paper!) 3 visualizations inspired by the Dear Data project over the next few weeks. You will first collect personal data, and then sketch 3 visualizations that encode this data using creative, artistic, and whimsical visual encodings inspired by the work of Georgia Lupi and Staphanie Posavec. You will then provide brief design rationales for each of your sketches as well as a reflection on the overall process.

## 1. Background
**Why sketch?**

Why not just dive right into coding or using some visualization tool? Sketching is a quick and cheap form of prototyping — a process of simulating how a finished product could look and work. Prototyping is a critical part of the design process as it allows us to test the feasibility of our ideas early on. A prototype’s “fidelity” refers to how much it is able to convey the look of the final product in terms of its level of detail. By moving from low-fidelity prototypes to higher-fidelity ones, we can develop and polish our ideas gradually, focusing on one particular aspect of the product at a time [(Babich, 2017)](https://blog.adobe.com/en/publish/2017/11/29/prototyping-difference-low-fidelity-high-fidelity-prototypes-use).

But prototyping (and sketching, in particular) is also extremely helpful in generating ideas. Rather than grappling with the functionality of any given design tool (which can often influence your design process, even implicitly), or committing to any one specific design, sketching allows us to more rapidly explore the space of possible designs. And research has shown that prototyping several ideas in parallel often leads to better outcomes ([Dow et al., 2011;](https://doi.org/10.1145/1879831.1879836) [Tohidi et al., 2006](https://doi.org/10.1145/1124772.1124960)). As Nadieh Bremer, accomplished visualization designer, says:

> “It makes me feel more human/normal to think that the people I admire also didn’t come up with their final dataviz in one perfect go.” - Nadieh Bremer

Sketching allows you to reflect and refine your visualizations. Take a look at some of the blog posts that Nadieh and Shirley Wu wrote for their [Data Sketches](https://www.datasketch.es/) project, and you will see many iterations of hand-drawn sketches in addition to code. Just like any other activity, sketching can seem intimidating if you have never done it before. So we have compiled some inspiring examples and left you some tips at the end of this page.

**Why collect personal data?**

There are several reasons for collecting personal data. Spending time with your data will help you better understand yourself. It helps you reflect on what makes you you. The data you collect and the choices you make reflect your personality. It is a way to figure out what is really important to you, since measuring something means that it matters. Finally, collecting personal data is another way to document your life, just as words in a journal and images you capture are documenting your human experience.

## 2. Collecting Your Data
**What data to collect**

Think about what personal data you want to collect over the next two weeks. Anything that can be measured is data, and any measurement that relates to you and your life is personal data. Examples include drinks, sounds, transportation, fitness, indecision, compliments, relationships, mirrors, emotions, workspaces, sports, apologies, things you buy, laughter, complaints, food, etc.

**How much data to collect**

You must collect data for **at least 5 days with at least 3 observations per day**, so make sure to get started early. We recommend that each data item (i.e., rows in your data table) has at least 5 attributes (i.e., columns in your data table), including the date and time when you collected each item. More attributes are better, especially if they are used to make connections between different data items (e.g., how people are connected, and who they are connected to). Note that this is the **minimum data collection requirement**, exceptional submissions will almost certainly want to collect more data than what is required and then choose what they wish to represent in their final sketches.

*Example:* You decide to collect data about butterflies. Each row of your data table will be a butterfly sighting. The first attribute is the day and time of when you saw the butterfly. Other attributes (columns) in your table are where you saw it, its color, what mood you were in (using emojis), and what kind of butterfly you think it was. You make sure to keep an eye out for butterflies to hopefully see at least three of them each day. If you don’t, you can make up a couple of sightings (but do not cheat too much).

**How to collect your data**

To collect your data we strongly suggest you use pen and paper. You can easily carry them around with you all week long, they never need power, and they are easier and more fun to use. When you are done, transfer your data into a table if it is not already in table form. Put the data items into rows and the attributes into columns.
Make sure to label each column and to provide additional explanations for your data attributes below your table, including at least what they mean, how you collected them, and their data type (categorical, ordinal, or quantitative).

*Example:* Below is a picture of an example data table for the butterfly data, including a legend that explains each attribute.

**How to submit your data**

If you collected your data on paper, take a picture of your table and submit it with your homework document. If you like, you can also transfer your data to a spreadsheet and include that in your homework hand-in. A spreadsheet allows you to easily compute aggregate statistics, e.g., averages, medians, or percentages, although you can also do that with pen and paper.

## 3. Visualizing Your Data
**How to Sketch**

The goal of this homework assignment is not to reproduce “standard” visualizations such as bar charts, scatterplots, line charts, pie charts, etc using your personal data. Such submissions will likely result in low marks. Instead, take inspiration from Data Sketches, and come up with new visual encodings of your  data.

**Iterations and Final Sketch**

Once you’ve got your inspiration and personal data, sketched a few ideas, and iterated on them, it is time to submit your three best sketches. Again, we want you to sketch your visualizations by hand, either using pen and paper or a tablet and electronic pencil. We do not want you to be overly constrained, so you can use any page size or format that you like. Please use thick strokes and bold colors that are easy to see from a distance and that will reproduce well once you take a photo of your sketch (assuming it was done on paper). As before, we want you to use at least five of your data attributes in your final sketch.

Similar to the Dear Data project, we also want you to create a legend that explains how each of your data attributes is visually encoded. The legend can be drawn on a separate piece of real or electronic paper. Again, make sure to use thick strokes or large fonts to make the writing easy to read. If you like, you can also add the legend directly to your sketch using lines and arrows that make the connection from your visuals to your data. You must also add **one paragraph** for each of your sketches where you briefly explain your sketch and the design rationale to us (e.g., What was your motivation behind generating this sketch? What were you hoping it would communicate? What worked well and what didn’t?).

Finally, write **one paragraph** reflecting on the process of developing your 3 sketches overall. Compare your designs with each other — what are their strengths and weaknesses? What new directions might you explore (e.g., synthesizing elements from every sketch, or describing why one of them is significantly better than the others?).

## Your Tasks
**Week 1**

1. Start by **choosing a question/topic** you’d like a visualization to answer/document.
2. Collect personal data for your chosen question/topic - remember you must collect data for **at least 5 days, with 3 observations per day** with **at least 5 attributes** (this is the bare minimum, exceptional work will likely want to collect more data than this to sufficiently answer their question/topic).

**Week 2**

3. Design **3 different visualization paper sketches** that you believe effectively tackle your question/topic.
4. Write **one paragraph per sketch** about the rationale for your design decisions. (See details above.)
5. Write **one paragraph **that reflects on all 3 of your sketches overall. (See details above.)

Your sketches should be interpretable without consulting your write-ups. Do not forget to include the title, axis labels or legends as needed!

Your sketches do not necessarily have to include every datapoint you collect (especially if you collect more data than the minimum requirement), or even accurately represent the data depending on the direction you take your sketch. The goal of this assignment is to draft different visualization designs. Thus, it is more important that your visualizations are “original” rather than “perfect”; they should communicate three ideas that you would plausibly be excited to continue exploring (maybe even in subsequent assignments or the final project). In fact, we encourage you to use sharpies/markers/felt-tip pens so that your lines are thicker and you are less focused on being “accurate.”

*Note: For this assignment, you should not analyze or visualize the data with data visualization tools such as Vega(-Lite), Tableau, or Chart.js. We instead expect you to just look at the dataset and create hand-drawn sketches.*

## Grading
This assignment is scored out of a maximum of 10 points. We will determine scores by judging the diversity of your sketches, the creativity of your ideas, and the crispness of your write ups.

You can be awarded a maximum of 3 points for each sketch and its related reflection. A functional sketch that squarely meets the requirements can expect to earn 2 points. The remaining point will be awarded for communicating your overall reflection across the 3 sketches as described in the above section “Your Tasks”. We also reserve the right to penalize any submissions with overly lengthy reflections; that do not meet the minimum data collection requirements, etc.

## Submission Details/Checklist
This is an individual assignment. **You may not work in groups.** Your completed assignment is due on **Friday 1/30, 11:59 pm ET**.

Submit your assignment on Markus. Make sure to include the following:
- [ ]  The personal data you have collected (either as a PDF or a tabular format)
- [ ]  Your 3 final sketches, the associated writeup for each sketch, and the writeup reflecting on your 3 sketches overall as a **single PDF file**.

Make sure your images are sized for a reasonable viewing experience — readers should not have to zoom or scroll in order to effectively view any sketch!

## Tips and Inspiration
- Use a sharpie/marker. Thick lines free you from worrying about the fine-grained details and accuracy of your sketch, and instead focus you on sketching the big picture ideas.
- Similarly, we recommend using pens over pencils — not being able to “undo” your mistakes by erasing them can be remarkably conducive to generating designs.
- You are free to use different colors and any other sketching techniques you can think of (e.g., dotted patterns, cross hatching, etc.).
- You may sketch on touchscreen-enabled devices (e.g., iPads) but we do not recommend them for the same reasons as using pencils — it’s too easy to hit “undo.”
- [Nadieh Bremer & Shirley Wu’s Data Sketches](https://www.datasketch.es/)
- [How to Sketch, Doodle, and Draw Data Visualization Drafts by Hand](https://depictdatastudio.com/how-to-sketch-doodle-and-draw-data-visualization-drafts-by-hand/) (although your sketches should be more creative than the ones depicted here)
- [Sketching with Data Opens the Mind’s Eye](https://medium.com/accurat-studio/sketching-with-data-opens-the-mind-s-eye-92d78554565)
- For further reading, we recommend Bill Buxton’s [Sketching User Experiences book](https://books.google.com/books/about/Sketching_User_Experiences_Getting_the_D.html?id=2vfPxocmLh0C&printsec=frontcover&source=kp_read_button&newbks=1&newbks_redir=0#v=onepage&q&f=false) (which builds off the paper linked above).

Commit message:

Enhance submission guidelines and sketching tips

homeworks/dear_data.md, after:

---
title: A1 - Dear Data
---

# Assignment 1: Dear Data

In this assignment, you will observe, collect, and sketch (with pen and paper!) 3 visualizations inspired by the Dear Data project over the next few weeks. You will first collect personal data, and then sketch 3 visualizations that encode this data using creative, artistic, and whimsical visual encodings inspired by the work of Georgia Lupi and Staphanie Posavec. You will then provide brief design rationales for each of your sketches as well as a reflection on the overall process.

## 1. Background
**Why sketch?**

Why not just dive right into coding or using some visualization tool? Sketching is a quick and cheap form of prototyping — a process of simulating how a finished product could look and work. Prototyping is a critical part of the design process as it allows us to test the feasibility of our ideas early on. A prototype’s “fidelity” refers to how much it is able to convey the look of the final product in terms of its level of detail. By moving from low-fidelity prototypes to higher-fidelity ones, we can develop and polish our ideas gradually, focusing on one particular aspect of the product at a time [(Babich, 2017)](https://blog.adobe.com/en/publish/2017/11/29/prototyping-difference-low-fidelity-high-fidelity-prototypes-use).

But prototyping (and sketching, in particular) is also extremely helpful in generating ideas. Rather than grappling with the functionality of any given design tool (which can often influence your design process, even implicitly), or committing to any one specific design, sketching allows us to more rapidly explore the space of possible designs. And research has shown that prototyping several ideas in parallel often leads to better outcomes ([Dow et al., 2011;](https://doi.org/10.1145/1879831.1879836) [Tohidi et al., 2006](https://doi.org/10.1145/1124772.1124960)). As Nadieh Bremer, accomplished visualization designer, says:

> “It makes me feel more human/normal to think that the people I admire also didn’t come up with their final dataviz in one perfect go.” - Nadieh Bremer

Sketching allows you to reflect and refine your visualizations. Take a look at some of the blog posts that Nadieh and Shirley Wu wrote for their [Data Sketches](https://www.datasketch.es/) project, and you will see many iterations of hand-drawn sketches in addition to code. Just like any other activity, sketching can seem intimidating if you have never done it before. So we have compiled some inspiring examples and left you some tips at the end of this page.

**Why collect personal data?**

There are several reasons for collecting personal data. Spending time with your data will help you better understand yourself. It helps you reflect on what makes you you. The data you collect and the choices you make reflect your personality. It is a way to figure out what is really important to you, since measuring something means that it matters. Finally, collecting personal data is another way to document your life, just as words in a journal and images you capture are documenting your human experience.

## 2. Collecting Your Data
**What data to collect**

Think about what personal data you want to collect over the next two weeks. Anything that can be measured is data, and any measurement that relates to you and your life is personal data. Examples include drinks, sounds, transportation, fitness, indecision, compliments, relationships, mirrors, emotions, workspaces, sports, apologies, things you buy, laughter, complaints, food, etc.

**How much data to collect**

You must collect data for **at least 5 days with at least 3 observations per day**, so make sure to get started early. We recommend that each data item (i.e., rows in your data table) has at least 5 attributes (i.e., columns in your data table), including the date and time when you collected each item. More attributes are better, especially if they are used to make connections between different data items (e.g., how people are connected, and who they are connected to). Note that this is the **minimum data collection requirement**, exceptional submissions will almost certainly want to collect more data than what is required and then choose what they wish to represent in their final sketches.

*Example:* You decide to collect data about butterflies. Each row of your data table will be a butterfly sighting. The first attribute is the day and time of when you saw the butterfly. Other attributes (columns) in your table are where you saw it, its color, what mood you were in (using emojis), and what kind of butterfly you think it was. You make sure to keep an eye out for butterflies to hopefully see at least three of them each day. If you don’t, you can make up a couple of sightings (but do not cheat too much).

**How to collect your data**

To collect your data we strongly suggest you use pen and paper. You can easily carry them around with you all week long, they never need power, and they are easier and more fun to use. When you are done, transfer your data into a table if it is not already in table form. Put the data items into rows and the attributes into columns.
Make sure to label each column and to provide additional explanations for your data attributes below your table, including at least what they mean, how you collected them, and their data type (categorical, ordinal, or quantitative).

*Example:* Below is a picture of an example data table for the butterfly data, including a legend that explains each attribute.

**How to submit your data**

If you collected your data on paper, take a picture of your table and submit it with your homework document. If you like, you can also transfer your data to a spreadsheet and include that in your homework hand-in. A spreadsheet allows you to easily compute aggregate statistics, e.g., averages, medians, or percentages, although you can also do that with pen and paper.

## 3. Visualizing Your Data
**How to Sketch**

The goal of this homework assignment is not to reproduce “standard” visualizations such as bar charts, scatterplots, line charts, pie charts, etc using your personal data. Such submissions will likely result in low marks. Instead, take inspiration from Data Sketches, and come up with new visual encodings of your  data.

**Iterations and Final Sketch**

Once you’ve got your inspiration and personal data, sketched a few ideas, and iterated on them, it is time to submit your three best sketches. Again, we want you to sketch your visualizations by hand, either using pen and paper or a tablet and electronic pencil. We do not want you to be overly constrained, so you can use any page size or format that you like. Please use thick strokes and bold colors that are easy to see from a distance and that will reproduce well once you take a photo of your sketch (assuming it was done on paper). As before, we want you to use at least five of your data attributes in your final sketch.

Similar to the Dear Data project, we also want you to create a legend that explains how each of your data attributes is visually encoded. The legend can be drawn on a separate piece of real or electronic paper. Again, make sure to use thick strokes or large fonts to make the writing easy to read. If you like, you can also add the legend directly to your sketch using lines and arrows that make the connection from your visuals to your data. You must also add **one paragraph** for each of your sketches where you briefly explain your sketch and the design rationale to us (e.g., What was your motivation behind generating this sketch? What were you hoping it would communicate? What worked well and what didn’t?).

Finally, write **one paragraph** reflecting on the process of developing your 3 sketches overall. Compare your designs with each other — what are their strengths and weaknesses? What new directions might you explore (e.g., synthesizing elements from every sketch, or describing why one of them is significantly better than the others?).

## Your Tasks
**Week 1**

1. Start by **choosing a question/topic** you’d like a visualization to answer/document.
2. Collect personal data for your chosen question/topic - remember you must collect data for **at least 5 days, with 3 observations per day** with **at least 5 attributes** (this is the bare minimum, exceptional work will likely want to collect more data than this to sufficiently answer their question/topic).

**Week 2**

3. Design **3 different visualization paper sketches** that you believe effectively tackle your question/topic.
4. Write **one paragraph per sketch** about the rationale for your design decisions. (See details above.)
5. Write **one paragraph **that reflects on all 3 of your sketches overall. (See details above.)

Your sketches should be interpretable without consulting your write-ups. Do not forget to include the title, axis labels or legends as needed!

Your sketches do not necessarily have to include every datapoint you collect (especially if you collect more data than the minimum requirement), or even accurately represent the data depending on the direction you take your sketch. The goal of this assignment is to draft different visualization designs. Thus, it is more important that your visualizations are “original” rather than “perfect”; they should communicate three ideas that you would plausibly be excited to continue exploring (maybe even in subsequent assignments or the final project). In fact, we encourage you to use sharpies/markers/felt-tip pens so that your lines are thicker and you are less focused on being “accurate.”

*Note: For this assignment, you should not analyze or visualize the data with data visualization tools such as Vega(-Lite), Tableau, or Chart.js. We instead expect you to just look at the dataset and create hand-drawn sketches.*

## Grading
This assignment is scored out of a maximum of 10 points. We will determine scores by judging the diversity of your sketches, the creativity of your ideas, and the crispness of your write ups.

You can be awarded a maximum of 3 points for each sketch and its related reflection. A functional sketch that squarely meets the requirements can expect to earn 2 points. The remaining point will be awarded for communicating your overall reflection across the 3 sketches as described in the above section “Your Tasks”. We also reserve the right to penalize any submissions with overly lengthy reflections; that do not meet the minimum data collection requirements, etc.

## Submission Details/Checklist
This is an individual assignment. **You may not work in groups.** Your completed assignment is due on **Friday 1/30, 11:59 pm ET**.

Submit your assignment on Markus. Make sure to include the following:
- [ ]  The personal data you have collected (either as a PDF or a tabular format)
- [ ]  Your 3 final sketches, the associated writeup for each sketch, and the writeup reflecting on your 3 sketches overall as a **single PDF file**.

And follow these formatting guidelines:
- [ ]  Include a visual legend (not just text descriptions, but legends that use the marks/channels in your visualization!), either on the same page or on a separate sheet.
- [ ]  If working with paper, please use rulers or other straight edges for straight lines.
- [ ]  Please take a high-quality scan/image of your sketches; there are various scanning apps available for smartphones. Make sure the sketches are visible the right way up. Your images should be sized for a reasonable viewing experience — readers should not have to zoom or scroll in order to effectively view any sketch!
- [ ]  The below template serves as guidance for how to format the sketches in the PDF; Google Slides is an easy way to recreate this layout.
<img width="1511" height="847" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/8e82ff3f-45a5-4a09-90fa-b4496c843141" />

Up to 10% of your grade may be deducted for not following formatting guidelines.

## Tips and Inspiration
- Use a sharpie/marker. Thick lines free you from worrying about the fine-grained details and accuracy of your sketch, and instead focus you on sketching the big picture ideas.
- Similarly, we recommend using pens over pencils — not being able to “undo” your mistakes by erasing them can be remarkably conducive to generating designs.
- You are free to use different colors and any other sketching techniques you can think of (e.g., dotted patterns, cross hatching, etc.).
- You may sketch on touchscreen-enabled devices (e.g., iPads) but we do not recommend them for the same reasons as using pencils — it’s too easy to hit “undo.”
- [Nadieh Bremer & Shirley Wu’s Data Sketches](https://www.datasketch.es/)
- [How to Sketch, Doodle, and Draw Data Visualization Drafts by Hand](https://depictdatastudio.com/how-to-sketch-doodle-and-draw-data-visualization-drafts-by-hand/) (although your sketches should be more creative than the ones depicted here)
- [Sketching with Data Opens the Mind’s Eye](https://medium.com/accurat-studio/sketching-with-data-opens-the-mind-s-eye-92d78554565)
- For further reading, we recommend Bill Buxton’s [Sketching User Experiences book](https://books.google.com/books/about/Sketching_User_Experiences_Getting_the_D.html?id=2vfPxocmLh0C&printsec=frontcover&source=kp_read_button&newbks=1&newbks_redir=0#v=onepage&q&f=false) (which builds off the paper linked above).
